hey what's up some of you may not know I
was a scholar of Buddhism for more than
10 years studied ancient canonical
language blah blah blah spent time in
Buddhist temples with Buddhist monks
traveled by lectured I delivered
lectures myself at universities and I
visited and studied both in a totally
religious context but also in these kind
of semi-religious semi secular
university context but the vast majority
of what I learned I learned on my own
let me tell you because the vast
majority of what gets thought both
institutions is dishonest and
as you might already guess from the
candor of that statement I made within
the last 60 seconds i am not a true
believing Buddhist I never believed in
supernatural elements of Buddhism I
never believed in hell or heaven I never
believed that a meditation can have
supernatural effects or magical outcomes
for you but also today I identify as an
ex Buddhist I do not consider myself a
Buddhist at all so I do not believe in
the religion I do not believe in the
future of the religion however there are
still people who come to this channel
because they've read some of my work
from the past my past research on
Buddhism there's still people come to
this channel hoping I'm going to record
more videos talking about Buddhism as a
philosophy as a religion may be in
connection to politics or some of this
understandable I was one of the few kind
of sober voices is sober the word I want
to use expressing concerns but a lot of
what was going on in contemporary
Buddhism in the past and it's doubtful
i'm going to play that role again but
it's so cool that there are people who
are serious but us who respect what i
have to say and you send me questions
asking my opinion etcetera now these
days are mostly known for talking about
veganism so in this video I'm going to
talk a little bit about the prospects of
Buddhism in the future and naturally
people watching this channel will be
interested about Buddhism in connection
to animal rights ecology veganism but I
guess just you know Buddhism in terms of
real-world practicable ethics what are
the prospects I made a comment on
someone else's video lately another
vegan made a video which is not very
well-informed he hadn't done any
research on Buddhism he didn't know
either historical or contemporary what
the real ethical factors were but
another vegan made a video complaining
about the Buddhist practice
of buying animals so for instance a
caged bird or buying lobsters and then
setting them free in ceremonies to
generate good karma and all the
absurdities to go into this including
the fact that often they end up killing
the animals but anyway um and you know
observe this was for people who are
eating meat every day to be buying caged
birds and setting them free etc there
all these obvious contradictions in it
but I gave him a reply and I said look I
used to be a scholar Buddhism blah blah
blah I very briefly said both good and
bad about what's going on but it's and
one of the good things I said I said
look you know unlike other religions
Buddhism is susceptible to change it is
susceptible to improvement to say that
Buddha's of has changed a lot in the
last 50 years would be a great
understatement and to say it's changed a
lot in the last 100 years would be an
even more of an understatement Buddhism
has been rapidly changing in many
different directions so almost any
problem you can point to within Buddhism
for instance the status of women or the
status of eating meat or any of these
issues you can also point to you know
counter currents and debates within
Buddhism that have challenged the status
quo when you can point to examples of
Buddhist traditions that have taken
radically different contradictory paths
in response to those questions should
women be equal should people eat meat
any possible a practical ethical
question you're going to get that kind
of diversity and debate on going
especially in the period right after
World War Two something I've made many
videos about and let's face it if you
were living anywhere in the continent of
Asia after World War 2 the spectacle of
the atom bomb on the one hand and the
spectacle of the rise of communism for
example in China these were major
inspirations for the religion to
re-evaluate its past present and future
so that was a period of especially rapid
change and I do not think you can find a
similar period of change in the last
hundred years for Christianity um for
example certainly their Christianity has
also changed don't get me wrong I know
I'm aware just look just look at the
Vatican the Vatican is taking on radical
new
ideas every week I'm sure I realize
there have been some changes but I'm
saying that within Buddhism the change
has been much more profound much more
unpredictable and is still ongoing okay
so let's break down what are we talking
about if we're really looking at
Buddhism now and in the future in
reference to these shall we say thematic
concerns of mine um I remember reading
an interview with the Cambodian man who
had converted from Buddhism to
Christianity so he had grown up with
Buddhism and convert to Christianity and
one of the things he pointed out which I
thought was very insightful is that in
Buddhism there is a concept of virtue
but not of enough virtue not of adequate
virtue whereas one of the things he
liked about Christianity was that in
Christianity there was a very clear
point at which you had done enough you
believed enough you did enough you were
good enough and it was certain that when
you died you go to heaven that's it now
I read that I didn't meet that man i
read that recently here in china i met
someone who was a member of one of the
indigenous ethnic minorities i won't
give all the details but she grew up in
a culturally Buddhist setting tera vaada
buddha 'the but she also she was a
Christian I think I think her mother
converted to Christianity someone in her
family so she didn't make the decision
itself and it was fascinated me because
she made the same point for her also
this was a big deal she said yeah you
know Buddhism she sort of said worse to
Buddhism is more interesting like
Buddhism has more philosophy it's more
nuanced that's more complex but in
Christianity it's simple this is what
you have to do and then it's enough it's
enough virtue then you know you're saved
you got the checklist of what you have
to do to get into heaven and once you've
checked all the boxes you're done so I
think it is interesting Buddhism on the
one hand is known for being very morally
permissive which it is if you go to
Thailand a lot of people think Buddhism
has no restrictions on sexual behavior
because a culture like Thailand today is
so permissive Buddhism kind of stairs
out of the world as in terms of infinite
virtue and yet insufficient virtue
this is interesting is you know
interacts with things like ecology and
animal rights and veganism in a very
strange way to refuse to kill animals is
virtuous in Buddhism so you think there
there's already a powerful wonderful
basis for future veganism in ecology but
in the other hand it's sort of in this
miasma where well you know quitting
smoking is virtuous refusing to kill
animals as virtuous nobody can be
virtuous all the time violence is
inevitable even you know torture and
killing and joining the army is
inevitable so you know people should
kind of sort of try their best all the
time and yet in a country like Thailand
it seems that you're surrounded by
people who are never trying their best
at any time that this sense that you
know individuals pursue virtue not
within one human lifetime not with one
goal of getting into heaven after they
die not with one checklist for what's a
sin and what's virtue but that they are
playing this game against a millennium
long epic spanning you know cycle of
reincarnation that vice and virtue that
indulgences and you know glorious acts
they've gone on for millions of years
through all your former lifetimes and
your future lifetimes and thus the
significance of you know eating meat at
any one meal this seems to recede into
the background is a tiny and trivial
thing it is very rare to meet devout
Buddhists who give a damn about eating
meat and I've met people who quit being
Buddhists for that reason who actually
changed religions because they did care
about ecology and veganism and so they
they switch to another religion because
they they got fed up with the
indifference that exists within Buddhism
now I could also say without getting on
to a too much length the emphasis on
intellectual virtues in Buddhism is more
or less unique in world religions and
I've also seen Christians complaining
about that what they say oh well
Buddhists you're a bunch of
snobs you care about these intellectual
virtues you don't care so much about the
loving and caring kind of mom-and-pop
virtues that critique has some merit to
it and it's true the kind of peculiar
intellectual snobbery within tera vaada
Buddhism also true with in Japanese but
as in many forms of wisdom there is kind
of a sense often like well why would you
even concern yourself with something as
low as killing animals or the the mud
and blood of these sorts of animal
ethics issues when you can instead be
directing your attention to the life of
the mind the life you know these more
refined supposedly refined an element
into refined and elegant intellectual
pursuits and concerns than bosom so that
is true I think there's a sense in which
the intellectual apparatus of Buddhism
becomes counterproductive in reference
to ethics and practical political action
even when you're faced with something as
obvious as let's bring it back to
ecology real quick I used to live and
work in Bangkok and I had a job that was
a government job put it that way so you
know you kind of went to a bunch of
strange locations that are owned by the
government the government owned a prison
and everything but decommissioning the
prison points I knew there they owned
this historical building you know this
wooden building in the word talking
about renovating it so I kind of went to
a few different construction sites as
part of this job ahead in in Bangkok one
of the government experts mentioned to
me in passing he said you know the
entire city the populated area of
Bangkok is less than 1 meter above sea
level above the ocean level and most
city you're down two millimeters in
Dennis centimeters and on the same day
they said that to me I was standing
there on this construction site and they
had one of these giant machines that
scoops the earth out of the way and as
soon as this machine put the metal into
the earth it was going down centimeters
and then there was water so you know the
surface of the earth of this
construction site was centimeters above
a semi saline sea level there the water
is a mixture of river water on the way
out it's a it's a river delta to be
blunt and of ocean water on the way
and you stand there and look at that and
this shockingly fragile ecology and
Bangkok periodically they flood in the
whole city is under water periodically
they have outbreak of disease as you'd
expect and you think people can ignore
this ecological threat even in this
setting you know I mean even when the
rising water is visible almost between
your toes you know questions of adequate
virtue questions of doing enough
questions of having a hard checklist of
what governments individuals should do
with ecology it's not about what you're
doing in the next ten incarnations I
don't really give a what you did a
thousand years ago when you were born as
a slave in Egypt or some I don't
believe in reincarnation at all in case
you can't guess my point is a worldview
that sees this society and this ecology
as a transitory and trivial problem
compared to the timescale of millions of
years in which they sincerely believe
that people are being reincarnated to
get it again and indeed that the world
itself regenerates again and there are
multiple worlds basically the same as
this one that arise and fall um the idea
we have to tackle this problem now in
the next ten years because we're really
concerned about the next 50 years of the
next hundred and fifty years actually
you know even though people glorify
Buddhism as somehow setting up a great
foundation for ecological concern in
many ways I feel the opposite and you
see this even with something as simple
as deforestation deforestation is in
many ways a lot easier to visualize and
chart out than global warming or rising
ocean levels why did Thailand cut down
all of its forests well looking at it in
terms of millions of years I guess in
that greater scheme of things elephants
going extinct tiger is going to thank
the last of the force being cut down
whose problem is it in Buddhism whose
problem is it is it the government's
problem I mean obviously most religions
do not have a modern democratic notion
of government is it your problem is it
my problem is the problem
for a bunch of vegan activists whose
problem is it we can't expect it to be
the corporations that make millions of
dollars out of cutting down the trees we
can't expect it to be timber
corporations and paper corporations so
whose problem is it it's not Buddhist
monks problem that's damned sure happy
he'll get over the last years and
there's been so much false excitement
over the few Buddhist monks who made
lectures here and they're talking about
ecology I know that about that I've read
about that but you know this is like you
can go through Catholicism and look at
the few catholic monks who supported the
legal right to abortion and within every
religion once you get into millions of
members of religion a large religion
there are going to be some outliers i
drooled i think there are some catholics
who support you know abortion as being
legal but I don't condone construe that
as something doesn't so I raised this
most general problem to begin with I
think if we're going to talk sincerely
about the future of Buddhism in
connection to the future of veganism
ecology etc just the future of planet
Earth um I think we also have to look at
it in terms of mythology and mythology
is maybe the aspect of Buddhism that
white Western people tend to overlook
the most or tend to avoid thinking about
the most they tend to want to address
Buddhism in terms of a relatively clean
philosophical system and not to deal
with the grubby reality of the mythology
for example hell in Buddhism if you do
bad things you die and you go to hell
and that hell is described at great
length many gory details exactly what
kind of torture you're going to get and
so on in the ancient scriptures and
that's why if you go on vacation in
Thailand you will see many gory
paintings of that hell on the walls of
Buddhist temples the best thing about
mythology is that it can lead you to ask
questions the otherwise wouldn't ask it
can spark interest it can spark the
mattock concern it can inspire you and
shape your life and positive way and the
worst thing about mythology is that it
prevents you from asking questions I
think this is I mean the example of Hell
itself is a very powerful example I
think that many many p
people do not question the nature of
good and evil whether it's personal sin
and virtue or public policy if they
believe as part of their religious view
of the world oh if you do blank you go
to hell it's kind of prevents any more
sophisticated sociological or political
you know philosophizing about reflecting
on uh you know what the issues and
options are yeah I don't know we could
give a million examples like the history
of homosexuality and religious backed
homophobia or even history of you know
government policy on drug use if you
start off with the view using this drug
means you die and go to hell you're not
going to ask questions that lead to a
more sophisticated harm reduction
approach or questions of what's
effective blah blah blah and you know i
mean the the united states of america
went through the ultimate experiment in
that through what's called prohibition
when they briefly made alcohol illegal
but yeah i mean if you believe something
is evil and results in you diane going
to hell that is probably not going to
inspire you to have an open-minded yeah
to engage in open minded original
research into really understanding the
problem politically ethically socially
or otherwise well now what where does
that lead us why is it that the role of
mythology in human society and culture
is so often to provide a kind of halt to
the progress of free inquiry and
understanding and so rarely to raise and
open up new and positive question in
dealing sincerely with the prospects of
Buddhism as a religion for the future I
think we do have to look at the
mythology and that mythology includes
hell and the mythology in a very real
sense is not going to change people's
attitudes towards the mythology change
the philosophy can be very fast changing
um epochs in an abstract sensitive what
gets preached or what have you the
mythology and the worldview is not going
to change and you have to understand the
core mythology the core myth of
reincarnation even though it has built
into it the concept that killing an
animal is a bad thing that an animal in
a former life could have been a few
being or in its next life could have
been a human being you also have to
recognize this has built into it a real
application of personal responsibility
and in a sense of real annihilation of
the dignity of the particular animal or
the importance of the particular animal
to some extent it also destroys the
sense of dignity or importance of a
particular human life although less so
partly because it holds up human life as
the apex of this pseudo evolutionary
cycle of incarnation every incarnation
that the ultimate thing that an animal
can become as a human being and by the
way even though human beings can be
reincarnated as gods gods or angels
sometimes pronounced but really we're
talking about gods gods in the plural
even the gods ultimately would like to
be reincarnated as human beings because
the opportunity to achieve nirvana the
opportunity to do virtuous deeds that
lies entirely with human beings so it
makes us very much the center of the
moral universe firmer side of the
intellectual universe and also in
Buddhism the gods are not wise a bit
like ancient Greece the gods don't
really know anything that we don't know
use big contrast to Christianity so you
know the gods some of them are kind of
buffoons like Zeus and Hercules they're
just not it is not particularly
intelligent they have the same
intelligence of a human being or less
and they is very clearly established
many times that the gods no less than
the Buddha knows that they're less wise
than I you know wise Buddhist monk what
have you uh you know when I made this
comment on this other youtubers video um
III closed it by saying okay look you
know so I was a scholar but isn't for
more than 10 years and have a lot of of
autism I can see both good and bad in it
I can see the potential for positive
change do I have any optimism for the
future not enough to be able to myself
so I not only to have the choice to be a
Buddhist I was a Buddhist I mean it was
a member of the religion and I quit I
became an ex post you know I've made
other videos reflecting on that uh you
know I don't want to hear repeat what
I've said in other videos my reasons for
not being a Buddhist are not the subject
of this video that the subject of those
videos I made in the past however I do
think it is foolish in the extreme to
assume that the aesthetics of Buddhism
when the mythology of Buddhism is going
to provide a powerful basis for veganism
the reality of what we're doing in Asia
with veganism is actually competing with
Buddhism we're actually offering people
an alternative that caters to some of
the same ethical impulses that many
modern Buddhists are seeking in Buddhism
and are being disappointed with you know
like there are modern Buddhists who
really care about animal rights who
really care about ecology and then they
go to the temple and they hear all this
horseshit that either pays instance your
lip service to those themes or fails to
even do that I have seen that myself
study that myself etc I mean the the
basic the fundamental evasion of this
worldly responsibility the the
fundamental advocate abdication of the
sense of we do this now or never it's
got to be this life it's got to be this
generation it's got to be this decade
you know to be blunt me me me now now
now that's that that's the undercurrent
in all like illogical politics including
veganism and that's totally antithetical
to the Buddhist world view if there were
if there's anything that is not going to
fly a tone nobody wants to strike when
giving a morality lectures about as monk
it's me me me now now now there instead
constantly emphasizing selflessness a
sense of selflessness that is I think
evasive and advocates responsibility and
a sense of timelessness so it's not me
me it's not now it doesn't have to be
this generation it doesn't have to be
this year that's very much built into
the mythology the world view the
aesthetics etc of Buddhism even though
you know certainly you can see
culturally if you compare Buddhism to
Islam Buddhism culturally is a much
better preparation for for veganism and
ecology both it's much better than Islam
infinitely better no no question there's
you know it's 10,000 times better but
nevertheless when we're looking ahead
when we're looking at the next step in
the twenty percent we're not looking
back we're not evaluating 500 years ago
or even 50 years ago say okay now I'm
moving forward it does seem to me very
obvious that in reality vegans and
ecologically concerned people are
inviting Buddhists to step away from
Buddhism and to join them to join us in
being vegans in being ecological
activists in being otherwise engaged in
this world and again with this
tremendous sense of urgency me me me now
now now I'm worried about Bangkok being
underwater I'm worried about this last
forest where there are a few elephants
still alive a few wild elephants a few
wild tigers I'm worried about this
stretch of river where there are a few
wild dolphins I need action I need
government resolutions I need activism I
need this worldly this generation
concern and yeah you know there's also
egoism there's also self-centred
activity involved and so on and I need
to and I also need you to take seriously
the suffering of particular animals you
know that the death of this one cow
matters that it's not just that we shrug
our shoulders and say well all of
existence is a cycle of suffering and
the only solution is nirvana blah blah
blah no no no no no no I want you to
look into this cows eyes I want you to
deal with the reality that to produce
meat that is not necessary and not
healthy you are causing this animal to
live its whole life in a concrete shed
and then die a miserable meaningless
death no
this cow this life today now face it
feel it oh and then let's get organized
let's get involving political activism
that whole direction even though I think
Buddhism may prepare people for it the
reality is that that is a direction that
leads away from Buddhism it's an exit
from Buddhism and I think it contradicts
the fundamental impulses aesthetics and
mythology of Buddhism because definitely
the cycle of reincarnation inclusive of
heaven and hell and gods and angels and
demons that is the central mythology of
Buddhism no matter how much weight
Western Buddhists might want to choose
to ignore it in trying to address their
interest to a sanitized westernized
modernized secularized and dishonest
misrepresentation of what Buddhism is
and why Buddhism has had such tremendous
tenacity over the last two thousand five
hundred years give me up